<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			
    <div class="chapter">
      <h4><a id="page281" name="page281"></a>the applicant</h4>
      <p>Pushing his adventurous shins through the deep snow that had fallen overnight,
      and encouraged by the glee of his little sister, following in the open way that he
      made, a sturdy small boy, the son of Grayville's most distinguished citizen, struck
      his foot against something of which there was no visible sign on the surface of the
      snow. It is the purpose of this narrative to explain how it came to be there.</p>
      <p>No one who has had the advantage of passing through Grayville by day can have
      failed to observe the large stone building crowning the low hill to the north of
      the railway station—that is to say, to the right in going toward Great
      Mowbray. It is a somewhat dull-looking edifice, of the Early Comatose order, and
      appears to have been designed by an architect who shrank from publicity, and
      although unable to conceal his work—even compelled, in this instance, to set
      it on an eminence in the sight of men—did what he honestly could to insure it
      against a second look. So far as concerns its outer and visible aspect, the
      Abersush Home for Old Men is unquestionably inhospitable to human attention. But it
      is a building of great magnitude, and cost its benevolent founder the profit of
      many a cargo of the teas and silks and spices that his ships brought up from the
      under-world when he was in trade in Boston; though the main expense was its
      endowment. Altogether, this reckless person had robbed his heirs-at-law of no less
      a sum than half a million dollars and flung it away in riotous giving. Possibly it
      was with a view to get out of sight of the silent big witness to his extravagance
      that he shortly afterward disposed of all his Grayville property that remained to
      him, turned his back upon the scene of his prodigality and went off across the sea
      in one of his own ships. But the gossips who got their inspiration most directly
      from Heaven declared that he went in search of a wife—a theory not easily
      reconciled with that of the village humorist, who solemnly averred that the
      bachelor philanthropist had departed this life (left Grayville, to wit) because the
      marriageable maidens had made it too hot to hold him. However this may have been,
      he had not returned, and although at long intervals there had come to Grayville, in
      a desultory way, vague rumors of his wanderings in strange lands, no one seemed
      certainly to know about him, and to the new generation he was no more than a name.
      But from above the portal of the Home for Old Men the name shouted in stone.</p>
      <p>Despite its unpromising exterior, the Home is a fairly commodious place of
      retreat from the ills that its inmates have incurred by being poor and old and men.
      At the time embraced in this brief chronicle they were in number about a score, but
      in acerbity, querulousness, and general ingratitude they could hardly be reckoned
      at fewer than a hundred; at least that was the estimate of the superintendent, Mr.
      Silas Tilbody. It was Mr. Tilbody's steadfast conviction that always, in admitting
      new old men to replace those who had gone to another and a better Home, the
      trustees had distinctly in will the infraction of his peace, and the trial of his
      patience. In truth, the longer the institution was connected with him, the stronger
      was his feeling that the founder's scheme of benevolence was sadly impaired by
      providing any inmates at all. He had not much imagination, but with what he had he
      was addicted to the reconstruction of the Home for Old Men into a kind of "castle
      in Spain," with himself as castellan, hospitably entertaining about a score of
      sleek and prosperous middle-aged gentlemen, consummately good-humored and civilly
      willing to pay for their board and lodging. In this revised project of philanthropy
      the trustees, to whom he was indebted for his office and responsible for his
      conduct, had not the happiness to appear. As to them, it was held by the village
      humorist aforementioned that in their management of the great charity Providence
      had thoughtfully supplied an incentive to thrift. With the inference which he
      expected to be drawn from that view we have nothing to do; it had neither support
      nor denial from the inmates, who certainly were most concerned. They lived out
      their little remnant of life, crept into graves neatly numbered, and were succeeded
      by other old men as like them as could be desired by the Adversary of Peace. If the
      Home was a place of punishment for the sin of unthrift the veteran offenders sought
      justice with a persistence that attested the sincerity of their penitence. It is to
      one of these that the reader's attention is now invited.</p>
      <p>In the matter of attire this person was not altogether engaging. But for this
      season, which was midwinter, a careless observer might have looked upon him as a
      clever device of the husbandman indisposed to share the fruits of his toil with the
      crows that toil not, neither spin—an error that might not have been dispelled
      without longer and closer observation than he seemed to court; for his progress up
      Abersush Street, toward the Home in the gloom of the winter evening, was not
      visibly faster than what might have been expected of a scarecrow blessed with
      youth, health, and discontent. The man was indisputably ill-clad, yet not without a
      certain fitness and good taste, withal; for he was obviously an applicant for
      admittance to the Home, where poverty was a qualification. In the army of indigence
      the uniform is rags; they serve to distinguish the rank and file from the
      recruiting officers.</p>
      <p>As the old man, entering the gate of the grounds, shuffled up the broad walk,
      already white with the fast-falling snow, which from time to time he feebly shook
      from its various coigns of vantage on his person, he came under inspection of the
      large globe lamp that burned always by night over the great door of the building.
      As if unwilling to incur its revealing beams, he turned to the left and, passing a
      considerable distance along the face of the building, rang at a smaller door
      emitting a dimmer ray that came from within, through the fanlight, and expended
      itself incuriously overhead. The door was opened by no less a personage than the
      great Mr. Tilbody himself. Observing his visitor, who at once uncovered, and
      somewhat shortened the radius of the permanent curvature of his back, the great man
      gave visible token of neither surprise nor displeasure. Mr. Tilbody was, indeed, in
      an uncommonly good humor, a phenomenon ascribable doubtless to the cheerful
      influence of the season; for this was Christmas Eve, and the morrow would be that
      blessed 365th part of the year that all Christian souls set apart for mighty feats
      of goodness and joy. Mr. Tilbody was so full of the spirit of the season that his
      fat face and pale blue eyes, whose ineffectual fire served to distinguish it from
      an untimely summer squash, effused so genial a glow that it seemed a pity that he
      could not have lain down in it, basking in the consciousness of his own identity.
      He was hatted, booted, overcoated, and umbrellaed, as became a person who was about
      to expose himself to the night and the storm on an errand of charity; for Mr.
      Tilbody had just parted from his wife and children to go "down town" and purchase
      the wherewithal to confirm the annual falsehood about the hunch-bellied saint who
      frequents the chimneys to reward little boys and girls who are good, and especially
      truthful. So he did not invite the old man in, but saluted him cheerily:</p>
      <p>"Hello! just in time; a moment later and you would have missed me. Come, I have
      no time to waste; we'll walk a little way together."</p>
      <p>"Thank you," said the old man, upon whose thin and white but not ignoble face
      the light from the open door showed an expression that was perhaps disappointment;
      "but if the trustees—if my application—"</p>
      <p>"The trustees," Mr. Tilbody said, closing more doors than one, and cutting off
      two kinds of light, "have agreed that your application disagrees with them."</p>
      <p>Certain sentiments are inappropriate to Christmastide, but Humor, like Death,
      has all seasons for his own.</p>
      <p>"Oh, my God!" cried the old man, in so thin and husky a tone that the invocation
      was anything but impressive, and to at least one of his two auditors sounded,
      indeed, somewhat ludicrous. To the Other—but that is a matter which laymen
      are devoid of the light to expound.</p>
      <p>"Yes," continued Mr. Tilbody, accommodating his gait to that of his companion,
      who was mechanically, and not very successfully, retracing the track that he had
      made through the snow; "they have decided that, under the circumstances—under
      the very peculiar circumstances, you understand—it would be inexpedient to
      admit you. As superintendent and <i>ex officio</i> secretary of the honorable
      board"—as Mr. Tilbody "read his title clear" the magnitude of the big
      building, seen through its veil of falling snow, appeared to suffer somewhat in
      comparison— "it is my duty to inform you that, in the words of Deacon Byram,
      the chairman, your presence in the Home would—under the
      circumstances—be peculiarly embarrassing. I felt it my duty to submit to the
      honorable board the statement that you made to me yesterday of your needs, your
      physical condition, and the trials which it has pleased Providence to send upon you
      in your very proper effort to present your claims in person; but, after careful,
      and I may say prayerful, consideration of your case—with something too, I
      trust, of the large charitableness appropriate to the season—it was decided
      that we would not be justified in doing anything likely to impair the usefulness of
      the institution intrusted (under Providence) to our care."</p>
      <p>They had now passed out of the grounds; the street lamp opposite the gate was
      dimly visible through the snow. Already the old man's former track was obliterated,
      and he seemed uncertain as to which way he should go. Mr. Tilbody had drawn a
      little away from him, but paused and turned half toward him, apparently reluctant
      to forego the continuing opportunity.</p>
      <p>"Under the circumstances," he resumed, "the decision—"</p>
      <p>But the old man was inaccessible to the suasion of his verbosity; he had crossed
      the street into a vacant lot and was going forward, rather deviously toward nowhere
      in particular —which, he having nowhere in particular to go to, was not so
      reasonless a proceeding as it looked.</p>
      <p>And that is how it happened that the next morning, when the church bells of all
      Grayville were ringing with an added unction appropriate to the day, the sturdy
      little son of Deacon Byram, breaking a way through the snow to the place of
      worship, struck his foot against the body of Amasa Abersush, philanthropist.</p>    
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
