<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			
    <div class="chapter">
      <h4><a id="page266" name="page266"></a>the famous gilson bequest</h4>
      <p>It was rough on Gilson. Such was the terse, cold, but not altogether
      unsympathetic judgment of the better public opinion at Mammon Hill—the dictum
      of respectability. The verdict of the opposite, or rather the opposing,
      element—the element that lurked red-eyed and restless about Moll Gurney's
      "deadfall," while respectability took it with sugar at Mr. Jo. Bentley's gorgeous
      "saloon"—was to pretty much the same general effect, though somewhat more
      ornately expressed by the use of picturesque expletives, which it is needless to
      quote. Virtually, Mammon Hill was a unit on the Gilson question. And it must be
      confessed that in a merely temporal sense all was not well with Mr. Gilson. He had
      that morning been led into town by Mr. Brentshaw and publicly charged with horse
      stealing; the sheriff meantime busying himself about The Tree with a new manila
      rope and Carpenter Pete being actively employed between drinks upon a pine box
      about the length and breadth of Mr. Gilson. Society having rendered its verdict,
      there remained between Gilson and eternity only the decent formality of a
      trial.</p>
      <p>These are the short and simple annals of the prisoner: He had recently been a
      resident of New Jerusalem, on the north fork of the Little Stony, but had come to
      the newly discovered placers of Mammon Hill immediately before the "rush" by which
      the former place was depopulated. The discovery of the new diggings had occurred
      opportunely for Mr. Gilson, for it had only just before been intimated to him by a
      New Jerusalem vigilance committee that it would better his prospects in, and for,
      life to go somewhere; and the list of places to which he could safely go did not
      include any of the older camps; so he naturally established himself at Mammon Hill.
      Being eventually followed thither by all his judges, he ordered his conduct with
      considerable circumspection, but as he had never been known to do an honest day's
      work at any industry sanctioned by the stern local code of morality except draw
      poker he was still an object of suspicion. Indeed, it was conjectured that he was
      the author of the many daring depredations that had recently been committed with
      pan and brush on the sluice boxes.</p>
      <p>Prominent among those in whom this suspicion had ripened into a steadfast
      conviction was Mr. Brentshaw. At all seasonable and unseasonable times Mr.
      Brentshaw avowed his belief in Mr. Gilson's connection with these unholy midnight
      enterprises, and his own willingness to prepare a way for the solar beams through
      the body of any one who might think it expedient to utter a different
      opinion—which, in his presence, no one was more careful not to do than the
      peace-loving person most concerned. Whatever may have been the truth of the matter,
      it is certain that Gilson frequently lost more "clean dust" at Jo. Bentley's faro
      table than it was recorded in local history that he had ever honestly earned at
      draw poker in all the days of the camp's existence. But at last Mr.
      Bentley—fearing, it may be, to lose the more profitable patronage of Mr.
      Brentshaw—peremptorily refused to let Gilson copper the queen, intimating at
      the same time, in his frank, forthright way, that the privilege of losing money at
      "this bank" was a blessing appertaining to, proceeding logically from, and
      coterminous with, a condition of notorious commercial righteousness and social good
      repute.</p>
      <p>The Hill thought it high time to look after a person whom its most honored
      citizen had felt it his duty to rebuke at a considerable personal sacrifice. The
      New Jerusalem contingent, particularly, began to abate something of the toleration
      begotten of amusement at their own blunder in exiling an objectionable neighbor
      from the place which they had left to the place whither they had come. Mammon Hill
      was at last of one mind. Not much was said, but that Gilson must hang was "in the
      air." But at this critical juncture in his affairs he showed signs of an altered
      life if not a changed heart. Perhaps it was only that "the bank" being closed
      against him he had no further use for gold dust. Anyhow the sluice boxes were
      molested no more forever. But it was impossible to repress the abounding energies
      of such a nature as his, and he continued, possibly from habit, the tortuous
      courses which he had pursued for profit of Mr. Bentley. After a few tentative and
      resultless undertakings in the way of highway robbery—if one may venture to
      designate road-agency by so harsh a name—he made one or two modest essays in
      horse-herding, and it was in the midst of a promising enterprise of this character,
      and just as he had taken the tide in his affairs at its flood, that he made
      shipwreck. For on a misty, moonlight night Mr. Brentshaw rode up alongside a person
      who was evidently leaving that part of the country, laid a hand upon the halter
      connecting Mr. Gilson's wrist with Mr. Harper's bay mare, tapped him familiarly on
      the cheek with the barrel of a navy revolver and requested the pleasure of his
      company in a direction opposite to that in which he was traveling.</p>
      <p>It was indeed rough on Gilson.</p>
      <p>On the morning after his arrest he was tried, convicted, and sentenced. It only
      remains, so far as concerns his earthly career, to hang him, reserving for more
      particular mention his last will and testament, which, with great labor, he
      contrived in prison, and in which, probably from some confused and imperfect notion
      of the rights of captors, he bequeathed everything he owned to his "lawfle
      execketer," Mr. Brentshaw. The bequest, however, was made conditional on the
      legatee taking the testator's body from The Tree and "planting it white."</p>
      <p>So Mr. Gilson was—I was about to say "swung off," but I fear there has
      been already something too much of slang in this straightforward statement of
      facts; besides, the manner in which the law took its course is more accurately
      described in the terms employed by the judge in passing sentence: Mr. Gilson was
      "strung up."</p>
      <p>In due season Mr. Brentshaw, somewhat touched, it may well be, by the empty
      compliment of the bequest, repaired to The Tree to pluck the fruit thereof. When
      taken down the body was found to have in its waistcoat pocket a duly attested
      codicil to the will already noted. The nature of its provisions accounted for the
      manner in which it had been withheld, for had Mr. Brentshaw previously been made
      aware of the conditions under which he was to succeed to the Gilson estate he would
      indubitably have declined the responsibility. Briefly stated, the purport of the
      codicil was as follows:</p>
      <p>Whereas, at divers times and in sundry places, certain persons had asserted that
      during his life the testator had robbed their sluice boxes; therefore, if during
      the five years next succeeding the date of this instrument any one should make
      proof of such assertion before a court of law, such person was to receive as
      reparation the entire personal and real estate of which the testator died seized
      and possessed, minus the expenses of court and a stated compensation to the
      executor, Henry Clay Brentshaw; provided, that if more than one person made such
      proof the estate was to be equally divided between or among them. But in case none
      should succeed in so establishing the testator's guilt, then the whole property,
      minus court expenses, as aforesaid, should go to the said Henry Clay Brentshaw for
      his own use, as stated in the will.</p>
      <p>The syntax of this remarkable document was perhaps open to critical objection,
      but that was clearly enough the meaning of it. The orthography conformed to no
      recognized system, but being mainly phonetic it was not ambiguous. As the probate
      judge remarked, it would take five aces to beat it. Mr. Brentshaw smiled
      good-humoredly, and after performing the last sad rites with amusing ostentation,
      had himself duly sworn as executor and conditional legatee under the provisions of
      a law hastily passed (at the instance of the member from the Mammon Hill district)
      by a facetious legislature; which law was afterward discovered to have created also
      three or four lucrative offices and authorized the expenditure of a considerable
      sum of public money for the construction of a certain railway bridge that with
      greater advantage might perhaps have been erected on the line of some actual
      railway.</p>
      <p>Of course Mr. Brentshaw expected neither profit from the will nor litigation in
      consequence of its unusual provisions; Gilson, although frequently "flush," had
      been a man whom assessors and tax collectors were well satisfied to lose no money
      by. But a careless and merely formal search among his papers revealed title deeds
      to valuable estates in the East and certificates of deposit for incredible sums in
      banks less severely scrupulous than that of Mr. Jo. Bentley.</p>
      <p>The astounding news got abroad directly, throwing the Hill into a fever of
      excitement. The Mammon Hill <i>Patriot</i>, whose editor had been a leading spirit
      in the proceedings that resulted in Gilson's departure from New Jerusalem,
      published a most complimentary obituary notice of the deceased, and was good enough
      to call attention to the fact that his degraded contemporary, the Squaw Gulch
      <i>Clarion</i>, was bringing virtue into contempt by beslavering with flattery the
      memory of one who in life had spurned the vile sheet as a nuisance from his door.
      Undeterred by the press, however, claimants under the will were not slow in
      presenting themselves with their evidence; and great as was the Gilson estate it
      appeared conspicuously paltry considering the vast number of sluice boxes from
      which it was averred to have been obtained. The country rose as one man!</p>
      <p>Mr. Brentshaw was equal to the emergency. With a shrewd application of humble
      auxiliary devices, he at once erected above the bones of his benefactor a costly
      monument, overtopping every rough headboard in the cemetery, and on this he
      judiciously caused to be inscribed an epitaph of his own composing, eulogizing the
      honesty, public spirit and cognate virtues of him who slept beneath, "a victim to
      the unjust aspersions of Slander's viper brood."</p>
      <p>Moreover, he employed the best legal talent in the Territory to defend the
      memory of his departed friend, and for five long years the Territorial courts were
      occupied with litigation growing out of the Gilson bequest. To fine forensic
      abilities Mr. Brentshaw opposed abilities more finely forensic; in bidding for
      purchasable favors he offered prices which utterly deranged the market; the judges
      found at his hospitable board entertainment for man and beast, the like of which
      had never been spread in the Territory; with mendacious witnesses he confronted
      witnesses of superior mendacity.</p>
      <p>Nor was the battle confined to the temple of the blind goddess—it invaded
      the press, the pulpit, the drawing-room. It raged in the mart, the exchange, the
      school; in the gulches, and on the street corners. And upon the last day of the
      memorable period to which legal action under the Gilson will was limited, the sun
      went down upon a region in which the moral sense was dead, the social conscience
      callous, the intellectual capacity dwarfed, enfeebled, and confused! But Mr.
      Brentshaw was victorious all along the line.</p>
      <p>On that night it so happened that the cemetery in one corner of which lay the
      now honored ashes of the late Milton Gilson, Esq., was partly under water. Swollen
      by incessant rains, Cat Creek had spilled over its banks an angry flood which,
      after scooping out unsightly hollows wherever the soil had been disturbed, had
      partly subsided, as if ashamed of the sacrilege, leaving exposed much that had been
      piously concealed. Even the famous Gilson monument, the pride and glory of Mammon
      Hill, was no longer a standing rebuke to the "viper brood"; succumbing to the
      sapping current it had toppled prone to earth. The ghoulish flood had exhumed the
      poor, decayed pine coffin, which now lay half-exposed, in pitiful contrast to the
      pompous monolith which, like a giant note of admiration, emphasized the
      disclosure.</p>
      <p>To this depressing spot, drawn by some subtle influence he had sought neither to
      resist nor analyze, came Mr. Brentshaw. An altered man was Mr. Brentshaw. Five
      years of toil, anxiety, and wakefulness had dashed his black locks with streaks and
      patches of gray, bowed his fine figure, drawn sharp and angular his face, and
      debased his walk to a doddering shuffle. Nor had this lustrum of fierce contention
      wrought less upon his heart and intellect. The careless good humor that had
      prompted him to accept the trust of the dead man had given place to a fixed habit
      of melancholy. The firm, vigorous intellect had overripened into the mental
      mellowness of second childhood. His broad understanding had narrowed to the
      accommodation of a single idea; and in place of the quiet, cynical incredulity of
      former days, there was in him a haunting faith in the supernatural, that flitted
      and fluttered about his soul, shadowy, batlike, ominous of insanity. Unsettled in
      all else, his understanding clung to one conviction with the tenacity of a wrecked
      intellect. That was an unshaken belief in the entire blamelessness of the dead
      Gilson. He had so often sworn to this in court and asserted it in private
      conversation—had so frequently and so triumphantly established it by
      testimony that had come expensive to him (for that very day he had paid the last
      dollar of the Gilson estate to Mr. Jo. Bentley, the last witness to the Gilson good
      character)—that it had become to him a sort of religious faith. It seemed to
      him the one great central and basic truth of life—the sole serene verity in a
      world of lies.</p>
      <p>On that night, as he seated himself pensively upon the prostrate monument,
      trying by the uncertain moonlight to spell out the epitaph which five years before
      he had composed with a chuckle that memory had not recorded, tears of remorse came
      into his eyes as he remembered that he had been mainly instrumental in compassing
      by a false accusation this good man's death; for during some of the legal
      proceedings, Mr. Harper, for a consideration (forgotten) had come forward and sworn
      that in the little transaction with his bay mare the deceased had acted in strict
      accordance with the Harperian wishes, confidentially communicated to the deceased
      and by him faithfully concealed at the cost of his life. All that Mr. Brentshaw had
      since done for the dead man's memory seemed pitifully inadequate—most mean,
      paltry, and debased with selfishness!</p>
      <p>As he sat there, torturing himself with futile regrets, a faint shadow fell
      across his eyes. Looking toward the moon, hanging low in the west, he saw what
      seemed a vague, watery cloud obscuring her; but as it moved so that her beams lit
      up one side of it he perceived the clear, sharp outline of a human figure. The
      apparition became momentarily more distinct, and grew, visibly; it was drawing
      near. Dazed as were his senses, half locked up with terror and confounded with
      dreadful imaginings, Mr. Brentshaw yet could but perceive, or think he perceived,
      in this unearthly shape a strange similitude to the mortal part of the late Milton
      Gilson, as that person had looked when taken from The Tree five years before. The
      likeness was indeed complete, even to the full, stony eyes, and a certain shadowy
      circle about the neck. It was without coat or hat, precisely as Gilson had been
      when laid in his poor, cheap casket by the not ungentle hands of Carpenter
      Pete—for whom some one had long since performed the same neighborly office.
      The spectre, if such it was, seemed to bear something in its hands which Mr.
      Brentshaw could not clearly make out. It drew nearer, and paused at last beside the
      coffin containing the ashes of the late Mr. Gilson, the lid of which was awry, half
      disclosing the uncertain interior. Bending over this, the phantom seemed to shake
      into it from a basin some dark substance of dubious consistency, then glided
      stealthily back to the lowest part of the cemetery. Here the retiring flood had
      stranded a number of open coffins, about and among which it gurgled with low
      sobbings and stilly whispers. Stooping over one of these, the apparition carefully
      brushed its contents into the basin, then returning to its own casket, emptied the
      vessel into that, as before. This mysterious operation was repeated at every
      exposed coffin, the ghost sometimes dipping its laden basin into the running water,
      and gently agitating it to free it of the baser clay, always hoarding the residuum
      in its own private box. In short, the immortal part of the late Milton Gilson was
      cleaning up the dust of its neighbors and providently adding the same to its
      own.</p>
      <p>Perhaps it was a phantasm of a disordered mind in a fevered body. Perhaps it was
      a solemn farce enacted by pranking existences that throng the shadows lying along
      the border of another world. God knows; to us is permitted only the knowledge that
      when the sun of another day touched with a grace of gold the ruined cemetery of
      Mammon Hill his kindliest beam fell upon the white, still face of Henry Brentshaw,
      dead among the dead.</p>    
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
